---
title: "lasting work"
date: 2022-05-02T16:08:49-04:00
draft: true
---

To escape the humdrum of the internet, I've decided to optimize my
workflow to allow for offline work, going as far as to download
stackoverflow and wikipedia in ZIM files so I can access humanity's
programming knowledge offline, and using devdocs so I can download and
cache the docs of many projects I use daily.

Today's post entails how to make a _lasting work_. I'll start by
considering what makes work important, which makes people want to keep
it working long into the future, and the design decisions that keep it
that way.

## Recognizing Important Work

To find important work, let's start by looking around. There's a
graveyard of work that didn't endure until the present day, but there's
plenty of work that has. This leads to the following realization:

1. Things that have lasted for a long time will probably continue to
   last (the Lindy Effect).

If you make 10 new things and compare them to something that has lasted
thousands of years, it's more likely that the thing that's lasted for
thousands of years will outlast the 10 new things. After all, that thing
that's lasted for thousands of years has outlasted countless other
things for thousands of years. If most things will last 10 years on
average, you'd be safe to bet on the old thing 10 times out of 10.

With this first principle, we can look around and find many things that
have stood the test of time. But we want our own work to follow in their
footsteps -- it's not good enough to just recognize it, we want to
recognize the patterns that make lasting work so we can create our own
work.

## What tends to last?

Consider Hammurabi's code, which was etched on stone tablets some four
thousand years ago.
