---
title: "Learn to Code"
date: 2020-03-27T12:46:45-05:00
draft: true
---

After meeting with my family briefly in Japan again, I learned that my brother was learning programming. I'm quite excited; I believe that software engineering has a great community and career prospects. Steve Yegge once said this about programming: "There has always been a strong demand, and being a software engineer is always a great way to have a great job for life." The journey to be self-taught in programming is arduous yet rewarding, and the ability to be able to equip oneself with the skills needed in an ever-changing world are in demand more than ever. Programming is hard and fulfilling, and as a problem domain, it allows you to solve problems that seem unfathomable to the lay person. It allows you to strut your creative side by finding unique solutions to problems in hard to uncover ways. It is an ever-rewarding field, with plenty to learn day in and day out.

To be an exemplar unto others, I believe one should tell stories. Humanizing stories. My story is not special. But it is uniquely mine, and I think we should strive to share the unique stories and episodes that led us to be who we are. For me, it was the stories told that attracted me to programming. To be the little guy to learn something he was told he couldn't, to be something he only dreamed of being. That is a good story, one worth sharing, and so, that's what I'll do with this post.

The story starts a few years ago, in the summer of 2017. I had rekindled an old friendship with an online friend of mine, and we began to talk more and more online. We eventually decided to see each other in Tokyo in the summer, and began dating soon after. But she could not stay, as she lived in America, and was soon to begin her doctoral studies there. She had a future, while I had very little in the way of ambitions or plans or feelings of certainty. We talked frequently (as much as we could, given the 13 hour time difference and my hectic work schedule), and she had reassured me about these tough times. She too faced the same problem once upon a time, where she didn't know whether or not to pursue more education in her field, but the pieces fell into place, and she was determined to become an academic. She was (and still is) my mentor, and was a kind voice of reason in a life of chaos and anxiety. I had, at this point, told my friend I would be an English teacher for his school that he had built up, and after teaching for this time, earned a hefty sum in my opinion, of \$1,500. I left the country I had known for four years with that money, and returned back to America, which I had left at seventeen, eager to return. It was a somber return -- after the grueling flights, I was greeted by my family, but never felt back at home. I wasn't doing well without my girlfriend. The times were not fun, with my parents telling me I was worthless for being jobless, and that I would never amount to anything in life. I had been besieged with loneliness for years, only to return to a life all to familiar with despair and powerlessness. I yearned for the times where I had independence and some pocket change to hang out with friends after a long shift at work, or finals with disparaging grades. I never did well in college, mainly due to working part-time on the side; I barely graduated with a 2.4 GPA, which precluded me from pursuing a masters education (most colleges ask for a 3.0 or a 3.5+ these days). The days were not great. But as I talked more with my significant other, I realized I needed to be proactive. I didn't want to fade into obscurity, and live a life filled with regrets. I needed to do something, anything.

I had been actively searching for a job at this time in the New Jersey area, but with little luck; I was just an average new grad with nothing to distinguish himself, and I had no connections, given that I had lived my adult life in a foreign country. Sending resumes into Indeed was like throwing trash down the chute -- I eventually became discouraged after sending hundreds upon hundreds of resumes, only to be rejected by machines. It was during this time that my significant other had suggested that I get a new computer (I had a crappy windows $400 laptop that was 5 years old), and she suggested getting a Macbook pro. I had never had a good computer -- the only computers I had were somewhere around the $400 range, windows, and oh, so slow. I had decided to pick up accounting during this time (it seemed lucrative), and so, I bought a new Macbook pro 2017 13", with a whopping 8GB of RAM and 128GB of disk space. This was underpowered even compared to my old machine, which had the same 8GB RAM, and 512GB of disk space, but man, this Macbook was great. I had downloaded a copy of QuickBooks, went over to the local library to pick up some books on accounting, and went straight to work. I learned some bits here and there, but it never came to fruition, and it never really clicked for me -- it wasn't something I cared about necessarily, so the days of studying were slow. On a day much like any other, however, I went onto youtube to watch some videos. I wanted anything mind numbing to get my head off of the chore of studying, and I found some videos by a guy named "Chris Sean". He had a video called [How I became a web developer in three months](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JRanDRgYxu8), and it was a bit puzzling. I thought programmers were supposed to go to school for programming, and it was hard and mathematical and tough, and yet, this guy who didn't graduate from high school, learned in three months enough programming to get a job? It challenged my whole worldview. I ate up his channel that night, and couldn't go to sleep with the possibility stuck in my mind. I wanted to be like him. I wanted to have work that I was stupid happy for, that I enjoyed, and have a better life for myself. I viewed the rest of his videos in the coming days and months, joined his discord channel, and learned about resources to learn how to code. I started out with [FreeCodeCamp](https://www.freecodecamp.org/), even though Chris Sean learned how to code using [Team Treehouse](https://teamtreehouse.com/). I quickly said to my girlfriend that I wanted to be a programmer, and she noted that she had friends in her circle who became self-taught programmers. I started out by learning HTML and CSS, and even built my [first page](https://github.com/Takashiidobe/Build-a-Tribute-Page), which was a FreeCodeCamp exercise. I was learning, and having fun, even while still being consumed by my feelings of inadequacy. It was all about taking baby steps.

During my free time, I believed it was important to read as much as I could, not just about programming, but about other things. I picked up Born a Crime by Trevor Noah, the Long Walk to Freedom by Nelson Mandela, and Grit by Angela Duckworth. I picked up the book on a recommendation from my father, who noticed it in the Japanese newspaper that he was reading. It seemed interesting, so I picked it up. It was life changing, since it taught me a different framework for life, and the internal struggle that Duckworth had with her father was one echoed between myself and my parents. Angela Duckworth's primary thesis was that grit, or hard work led to good outcomes, and that was brought on by passion for one's work. Angela's father was a history geek at heart, but on the behest of his father, became a chemist, later moving to America and working at DuPont and being extremely active in his field. They were at opposite ends, just like I was with my parents -- my mother had always wanted me to go be straight and narrow, work in business, sell stuff, live a life without much activity. But I never liked that, and so, I found in Grit a role model to shape my life behind. The Long Walk to Freedom taught me that it is important to see things through -- after being jailed for 27 years, Nelson Mandela left prison as a free man to become Vice President of South Africa. He had the grit to see things through, and sacrificed everything for his country. Born a crime taught me to see things through with optimism -- that even though Trevor Noah lived in apartheid (literally being illegally born), there was always a laugh or a way to find humor during dark times. Equipped with all of those learnings, I knew that even if these times were hard, they would not last forever. I had determination and a partner by my side. I was ready to see whatever I needed to through.

In December of 2017, I eventually got a job as an office worker in the area -- a dreary and stale job that I soon learned was not for me. The days were lax and meaningless, and the very little work I did have I found I could do within a few hours. I spent most of the time talking to the warehouse workers at the job, since I found them to have far more wisdom and insight than the boring office workers. I soon found myself moving cases around too when I could, and eating donuts with the workers, and one operator was an IT student. I managed to get in a few conversations with him about his own hopes and dreams, and he was much like myself, tired of working meaninglessly, and looking to support himself with more lucrative work. The work wasn't all terrible; the large gaps of free time gave me time to learn some javascript, as I had decided that I wanted to a web developer post haste, and also talk with my significant other, who was cross country, and having her own troubles getting acclimated to her own post graduate environment. The bad part about it was the hours -- I worked from 8AM to 5PM, with a two-hour commute coming back. My routine soon became like this: I would wake up at 5:30AM, exercise, eat breakfast, go to work, and then after coming back at 7PM, quickly ingest my dinner and learn to code for 2 hours until 9PM. I would then talk to my significant other for an hour before sleeping, and repeating the grind. This wasn't very helpful (I progressed little on my studies), and it soon began to wear me out. I was getting so little sleep I couldn't focus on my studies, and the lack of exercise was keeping my mind from being fresh. Soon, everything began to grind to a halt, as I was taking weekends off from burnout. There wasn't enough time for me to learn how to code. This all came to a head in April.

In April of 2018, after getting frustrated, and realizing I wasn't progressing, and realizing I wasn't getting closer to my significant other (distance-wise), I needed a change. I fought with my parents, and left the next day to move in with my significant other -- a rather prompt change. I was also de facto jobless, since my office work couldn't be done remote, so I was again in somewhere I didn't quite know (like Tokyo), and with little money (I had $8,000 in the bank, which would dry up within a year or so). Even worse, I had spent $800 on an overnight flight over, and had to buy supplies, since all I could manage to bring was a laptop and my cell phone. I had \$6,500, which meant I had a year at most, but it afforded me the time I needed to really deep dive on my studies. I knew very little web development, since I had cobbled together my curriculum from FreeCodeCamp and various Mozilla tutorials on MDN. My significant other offered to pay for rent until I was on my feet, and always gave me reassurance during the times when I couldn't sleep due to worry of running out of money. She connected me with her mentor who was running a lab related to VR programming, where I was mentored by another student who worked on the VR scenario. On the times where I wasn't at the university, I was fervently studying, day in and day out, perhaps to an unhealthy amount, because I had my back against the wall. I needed to make it or I would starve. I was also without insurance, which I don't recommend people do, since one hospital visit would leave me in debt. My significant other told me that if it didn't work out, we'd have to have a shotgun wedding so I could get on her student insurance.

As the months passed, I learned a little bit more about HTML, CSS, and JavaScript, but I enjoyed JavaScript the most, and always tried to learn more about it. I remember struggling for three days on trying to reverse a string, scouring all over MDN's documentation to patch together a way to do it. It's crazy to say this now, but it was only a year and a bit ago that I barely knew basic JavaScript. It probably didn't help that I was weaving Python into my JavaScript, and sometimes found myself mixing up the syntax of the two. I could barely even make a proper website (I still can't), and I was finding myself frustrated with my progress. To break up the monotony of studying Web Development and Python, I went to meetups in order to learn more about coding.

Meetups are a wonderful thing -- they are a place to meet people, make friends, and learn more about activities. In my case, there was a local firm hosting a web development meetup, so I thought it would be a boon to go. I took a bus up to their company campus, and talked to one of their employees. He told me all about Google's interview process (he was a competitive programmer), Google's new language, Go, and the perks of working as a programmer. At the end of it, I told him I was really looking for a foothold into the industry, and he referred me to an internal recruiter, who I talked to briefly. He said the company wanted someone with testing experience (what is testing?) and experience with a JavaScript framework (like React or Angular or Vue). Disappointed at not being able to move forward, I was a little bit sad, but hey, at least I knew what the industry wanted. I purchased some courses on udemy, like [The Web Developer Bootcamp](https://www.udemy.com/course/the-web-developer-bootcamp/) by Colt Steele, and [The Complete React Developer Course](https://www.udemy.com/course/react-2nd-edition/) by Andrew Mead. Both of these courses were excellent materials to prepare for Web Development, and I enjoyed going through both courses little by little, learning more about how the web works and the various tools commonly used in the industry. I kept sending out resumes on Indeed and making it to various meetups, asking around for advice in the industry on what was needed to be a Front-End Developer. It helped too to be in Chris Sean's Discord community at this point -- there were many Web Dev hopefuls in the channel, and we all found a way to confront the imposter syndrome that is so rampant in the industry, and shared learning tools and techniques to further our knowledge. Community is important. In fact, I had heard about a pretty famous firm in town that was known for paying extremely well (as this was a firm from San Francisco opening an office in my town), and were looking for some fresh developers on their new Angular project. I talked to them at another meetup, and found myself looking at the possibility of working a dream Front End Developer job. The only thing standing between me and the job was an interview.

The recruiter first gave me a take-home project with hard to understand guidelines and acceptance criteria -- after digesting the task, I set out to complete it, a simple website that supported an interactive graph with data. I set up a simple back-end to serve my frontend the JSON, and used a graphing library to display the data, with a dropdown to display the data in different ways. Pretty easy, right? Only thing was, this had to support IE8 (React does not), and I had to scour the internet for a graphing library that supported IE8 (answer: basically none of them did in 2018). After all that, I had to roll my own Webpack and Babel config and use the last version of React that supported IE8 (0.14?), and sent over a link to the github repo with a README that explained how to run the project. I waited for a few days, endlessly refreshing my inbox for confirmation that I did well. I had to, after all -- I doubt any old junior would've gone through the toil that this rather small project required. The email came, and it said something along these lines: "The site works as expected, but the engineer who did code review was wondering why you went out of your way to include IE8 support, when it was not necessary. This seems like a waste of time, and is a bad signal, since the candidate did not follow instructions". I was crushed, but pushed back, highlighting the part of my take home where I was instructed to use IE8. On a phone call with the recruiter a few days later, the company laughed it off, saying that this take-home was one given to their first programmers 4 to 5 years ago, and allowed me on-site. Score. I was told by the recruiter that the interview would be "technical", and would have two phases. The first day would have five interviews with the local team, and the second day (which would commence if I passed the first phase) would have five interviews with the second team.

For the next few weeks until the on-site, I focused on learning Data Structures and Algorithms (I figured that was what technical meant), and hopped onto leetcode. I etched into my head what a Linked List was, a Tree, a Graph, a Hashmap, and all of the basic algorithms I could, along with the basics of the internet, and basic HTML, CSS, and JavaScript. I knew that these would be the fundamentals that they would test on, and I was far from wrong.
On the interview day, I had my five interviews -- the first two were behavioral, where I talked to the Project Manager about my experience learning coding, and how I heard about the company. These went swimmingly, and I thought that I was able to convey my hard work ethic in the past months in order to learn programming. The last three interviews were technical. In the first interview, I was given a list of HTML, CSS, and JS questions to talk about, with questions like "What is a FOUC?" or "What is the difference between jQuery and Angular?" or "How do objects work in JavasScript?". These questions were generally pretty straightforward and gave me a lot of space to talk about various aspects of Web Development that I enjoyed. In the fourth interview, I talked to a Java Engineer who didn't know JavaScript, and he asked me to write an implementation of a Hashmap. This was a bit tricky since I had never written any Java, and the interviewer kept asking questions about types and data structures, but I was able to describe how JavaScript allows the implementator to elide most types, and wrote a pretty primitive hash function. This was good enough for a passing remark, and we talked more about the company, including the great benefits and such that the interviewer was glowing about. The final interview asked me a binary tree question (find a value in a binary search tree, or return -1 if it doesn't exist), which I solved recursively, and balanced parentheses, which is a stack based problem. Since I had not seen either question beforehand, I was a bit slow at both, but I did well enough to pass for the next interview, which was scheduled for the next week.

The next interview was far harder, but I started off well -- I was told to design the holy grail layout in google docs (a layout with a navbar, body, and footer), and passed the first interview with flying colors. The second interview asked me about event bubbling, and how to implement event bubbling on a list of items. This went poorer than expected, and I was also asked questions like infinite currying in JavaScript, and about the output of fairly cryptic pieces of code that were poorly formatted on the spot. I unfortunately couldn't do many of the questions, since they were fairly advanced in nature, and began to resign myself to my fate. The third interview involved a question about prefix sum, which is, given an array, find the index where the left and right hand sides of the array sum up to the same number. I failed that question, and a few more System Design questions about how to design an LRU cache, or practical caching for Web Applications, which left a dent in my confidence. The final two interviews were behavioral again, flipped from the first time, and although I did well on those two, I didn't have a positive experience from this interview, and the rejection email came back a week later, saying I didn't have strong enough fundamentals. While rejection was crushing, it wasn't anything more than I had been prepared for -- I was still looking for my first job, and there were going to be setbacks during the way. I was still determined to grab the foothold I needed. That opportunity came a few weeks later, where I interviewed for a local Web Development shop.

This web development shop was pretty bare, with a smaller engineering department, and definitely fewer furnishings. But they seemed pretty desperate for a new developer, since they responded to my application on a Saturday, which I didn't expect. I hastily set the interview for the next Monday, and sent in an example project of mine I had been stitching together, using Node.js, React, Redux, and MongoDB. Within an interview, I was offered a position, and made it onto my first web developer position. This was going to be my dream position, the one that I was going to use to catapult myself into programming! Unfortunately, it didn't quite work out that way, as I would soon find out.

The company wasn't doing well financially, which wasn't hard to understand once you saw the bowels of the company. Projects frequently missed their deadlines, tooling was spartan, and we had to create websites using a poorly documented and buggy internal framework which lowered velocity of development to a crawl. Developers were second class citizens to "Engineers", who were back-end Java Developers. The computers were slow, and the whole project would break multiple times a week, since testing was banned. We never knew when fixes or regressions were introduced, since version control was also banned. The whole company had shaky development practices, and it showed. Documentation did not exist, so it was difficult to meet customer demands. There was no DevOps or SysAdmin culture, so the servers would frequently crash while meeting our meager demands. There was a culture of blame which permeated through the company, with many employees throwing temper tantrums. My first project missed the mark when it was revealed to be buggy, and I soon realized I would have to jump ship, since this opportunity was not what I had wanted. I began going back to meetups and finding companies to talk to, but never made any progress in my local town. Eventually I found a remote position from an online friend I had met, and began talks to work for said company. Eventually, I was fired from my first position for looking for another job while working at said company, but I had pretty much confirmed a position at the remote position, so I was well prepared.

The remote position had a take-home for its interview, where I was asked to make an application that would allow the user to create a wallet of a set number of currencies, and allow the user to convert between currencies (say USD and JPY). In theory, this should be very easy, but there are a few caveats to consider -- we also needed persistence, so I could either decide to hook up a database, but decided to use localStorage instead, as I deemed it easier to save my state as JSON objects and parse them when required. The other problem was about dealing with currencies -- since computers do not implement fixed point arithmetic properly, you cannot rely on storing your currencies as numbers in JavaScript, since you will eventually lose or gain a cent when converting to and from the same currency repeatedly. This would be a buggy app. Instead, you should store your cents as integers, which I figured out the hard way, and display them to the user as strings, which took me a bit of time to figure out. Anyway, the interviews went ok, I was still weak on my JavaScript fundamentals, and I presume most of the team was ok with me in practice, but not thrilled. I ended up getting the position, however.

Working remote is very different from working in office, since your team members could be around the globe, and so it is hard to work synchronously (aka, grabbing your team members in a call). Instead, I learned to work asynchronously, and about the value of being loud when asking for help, since as an inexperienced junior, there was plenty for me to learn about. This firm's tech stack used Erlang, Elixir, and C on the backend (the C was mainly for cryptography), with React and Redux on the front-end. The team was incredibly capable, and the days working on features were incredibly fun. I learned a lot about smaller React patterns, as well as modern performance boons like code-splitting and lazy loading, as well as the way that Elixir and Phoenix handled routing and calling to the database. I gained a large respect for Elixir since we had far higher availability demands than at my previous workplace, and elixir allowed the app to work with little downtime. But we had run out of capital at this point, and eventually the company had to shut down. I was jobless, again. The job had only lasted for 2 months, until May of 2019.

It was at this point that I realized I needed a break -- after grinding and learning programming for the better part of a year non-stop, I wanted a short break from it all, and so I booked a ticket back home to do various clerical tasks, and to talk to my old high school friends about what they were up to. It was a nice change of pace, and I learned that it was normal to not know what you were wondering, and not such a bad thing to be in that phase of your life. I came back refreshed, ready to learn more programming, and became more interested in the fundamentals -- I picked up C++ at this time, and consider it my second best language (behind JavaScript). I learned up and down the stack as my curiosity permitted, and spent quality time with my significant other. It was a good time to take a break and a time for recharging. I made my way back into the meetup scene I had left for a while, and found another local company which was in the financial sector which caught my attention. I decided to interview with them and soon took a position with them, where I have been since. If you map out my story from Fall of 2017 to Fall of 2019, where I eventually started working at my current company, it took two years to get where I made it to now. Those two years were filled with toil and grief, but ultimately were the formative years of my life.

I learned that it is important to read, and take time off -- as important as it is to invest your time in doing the hard things, like learning how to code. I learned a lot on how to make connections and friends doing the things that you love, and how to invest in and grow a community. (I eventually gave a talk on Rust's ownership model at a local meetup, and still go to every meetup I can). I learned that you might not be happy the first time, and everything is not sunshine and rainbows, but there is a lot waiting on the other side of the rainbow for those willing to travel to it. Learning how to code has been the most fulfilling exercise of my life, and I wholeheartedly recommend it to anyone who's on the fence about learning to code.
