---
title: "Math, Hard Science and Soft Science"
date: 2022-02-02T10:38:53-05:00
draft: true
---

Tell me if you've ever heard this statement before: "X is a soft science
so I don't believe in it" or the equally scoffy "X field has Y
conclusion, so I don't believe in conclusions from field X". I hear this
all the time (can you tell I'm an economics major?), but I've never put
my thoughts in writing, so here we go: more fuel on the fire!

## Math and Logic

Let's start off with what I'll call "logic", also known as "a priori"
knowledge. There's a set of logic that is knowable without experience.
This involves any information derivable from logic itself, ad infinitum,
recursively.

The easiest metaphor for this is all of the misnamed "computer science":
Any computer has two states (0 or 1), and only needs to know one
operation (XOR). With just these three things, you can solve any
effectively computable problem, including things like artificial
intelligence, social networks, and sending memes to your friends at the
speed of light.

With the idea of 0, 1, and the ability to flip between them
at will, it is possible to encode any kind of textual information in numbers, or
create aggregate data types, or really anything computable.

Likewise, we can build a set of axioms that always hold true and are
only reliant on previous ideas built without sensory experience. For
example, if I say that 1 < 2 and 2 < 3 then I know that 1 < 3 (since 1 <
2 < 3).

All of math and the mathy parts of computer science fit here. This part
of knowledge is wonderful because things can be _provably_ true or
false. Any equation is either equal to something else or it is not. We
can disagree that 1 < 3, but someone is right and someone is wrong.

In this area of knowledge, while _finding_ a solution is very difficult,
it is generally _trivial_ to verify that such a solution is correct.
I'll use this as the defining factor of this section of knowledge: Hard
to find, easy to re-prove, and results are provably true or false.

Unfortunately, there are other questions that we have to solve: like
what constitutes life, or matter, or other things. Unfortunately, since
this section of knowledge is divorced from sensory matters, it cannot
provide the answers we want. For that, we'll have to move onto
"Science".

## Math vs. Science

Math and logic is provable without any sensory experience. But what
about the things that require us to "feel" things? Like calculating the
speed of light, or the nature of matter?

We can't use Math alone for this. These questions fall in the purview of
science, where sensory knowledge is the foundation of knowledge.

Light has to both exist and be measured in some way. We might use Math
to make a measurement, but we must execute the measurement ourselves, in
the physical world. Thus, you can think of Science as "Sensory details" +
Math.

I'm going to make a distinction here and say that everything in a hard
science is also provable. If certain problems are not provable, it is
because we either cannot measure something well enough, or our logic is
lacking to solve such a problem. So there are unsolved problems, but
that is not because they are "unsolvable", but rather that they are
currently unsolved.

## Soft Science

I'm going to go out on a limb and say that soft science deals with
problems that are nearly impossible to solve empirically or logically,
hence why this part of knowledge speaks the most in metaphors (since we
can neither have the absoluteness of logic or the sensory data of the
"hard" sciences).

To start off as we would in logic, we would have to start off from the
smallest atomic unit, see how each individual unit's collections change
the group's behavior, recursively, while validating each step of the way
empirically.

This is, unfortunately, with our current tools of measurement,
impossible. You can have an idea of how the parts of the cell work to
make the whole, but there are many types of cells which are connected to
each other in many different ways to make different kinds of tissue and
organs and humans.

Each level grows exponentially in complexity, and we barely understand
the first level well enough. It's not enough to be able to observe the
actions of each group, but rather, to be rigorous enough to find
determinism, one would need to start from the bottom and work their way
up. We can't do that right now.

We barely understand how one cell works, but we need to have theories
about how a large group of people work.

We're like this:

Here
|
v
Cells -> Tissue -> Organs -> People -> Villages -> Towns -> Cities ->
States -> Nations -> International Entities

Each level up takes an exponential amount of computation to fully encode
deterministically.

So we take shortcuts, in the name of having useful knowledge: you see,
just because knowledge isn't provable, doesn't mean it's not useful for
you and me. Philosophers have contemplated all of this before we had
much logic that could prove the basics of math or science. It's still a
powerful tool, even if it's not deterministic as the layers below it.
